Create a simple HUD documentation (#17)
gurkenlabs/litiengine-docs: user-interface/# Create a simple HUD.md

# Create a simple HUD

> a HUD (heads-up display) is used to render Graphics, used for game information, like a healthbar or a Toolbar. 

Reviewer: Please run a spellchecker over this page, since I'm seeing some instances of wrong capitalization.
```suggestion
A HUD (heads-up display) is used to render Graphics used for game information, like a health bar or a toolbar. 
```

> Litiengine provides a broad kit of Components for this with the `GuiComponents` class. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LITIENGINE provides a broad kit of Components for this with the [`GuiComponent`](https://litiengine.com/docs/user-interface/guicomponents-an-overview/) framework. 
```

Lets implement a simple HUD that creates a healthbar for us.

* ![Healthbar](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/105820458/173564612-9c57bf97-95b5-4c22-9058-8ed1ed3e28b2.PNG)

## 1. our HUD class

```java
package org.example;

import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.Game;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.graphics.ImageRenderer;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.graphics.Spritesheet;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.gui.GuiComponent;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.resources.Resources;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.util.Imaging;

import javax.tools.Tool;
import java.awt.*;
import java.awt.image.BufferedImage;

public class HUD extends GuiComponent {
    //create variables for our images that we want to render later, and scale them to the desired size

>     private static final BufferedImage HEART = Imaging.scale(Resources.images().get("src/main/resources/hud/life.png"), 5.0);

Reviewer: If the resources folder is configured correctly for your project, you only need to specify the file name, not the entire relative path.

    private static final BufferedImage HEARTEMPTY = Imaging.scale(Resources.images().get("src/main/resources/hud/herzleer.png"), 5.0);
   
    //optional / intialize a Padding variable, to change positioning easier later on

>     private static final int PADDING = 10;

Reviewer: One could also use values that are relative to the screen resolution in order to make the UI more dynamic.

    
    //call the super constructor, with the current game Windows Width and Hight to create a new HUD
    protected HUD() {
    super(0, 0, Game.window().getResolution().getWidth(), Game.window().getResolution().getHeight());
    }
    
```

> - its important to know, that the Image files for our BufferdImages can't be recieved from the litidata file, so be sure to provide the complete path in the file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It's important to know that the Image files for our `BufferedImage`s can't be received from the [game resource file](https://litiengine.com/docs/resource-management/), so be sure to provide the complete path in the file system.
```
That's actually not true. You can absolutely use images that are contained in the game resource file.

## The render methods

> now lets get to the visual part, the render methods of our `HUD` class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's get to the visual part, the render methods of our `HUD` class:
```

```java
 @Override
    public void render(Graphics2D g) {
        super.render(g);
        

>         //if there is no enviroment loaded we dont need to render anything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        //if there is no environment loaded, we don't need to render anything

```

        if (Game.world().environment() == null ) {
            return;

        }

>         this.renderHP(g);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        renderHP(g);
```

        }

    private void renderHP(Graphics2D g) {

        //define the x and y coordinates of our Healtbar 
        double y = Game.window().getResolution().getHeight() - Game.window().getResolution().getHeight() + PADDING * 7 - HEART.getHeight();
        double x = Game.window().getResolution().getWidth()  - ((Player.instance().getHitPoints().getMax() * (HEART.getWidth() + PADDING) * 1.28) - PADDING);
        

>         //decides weather to render a full or empty heart depending on the players current Hitpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        //decides whether to render a full or empty heart depending on the players current hitpoints

```

        for (int i = 0; i < Player.instance().getHitPoints().getMax(); i++) {
            BufferedImage img = i < Player.instance().getHitPoints().get() ? HEART : HEARTEMPTY;
            ImageRenderer.render(g, img, x + i * img.getWidth() + PADDING, y);

        }
    }

```

> - the x and y coorinates of this example place the bar in the upper left corner of the screen, but you can adjust these to your liking of course.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The x and y coordinates of this example place the bar in the upper left corner of the screen, but you can adjust these to your liking of course.

```

> ### you could also adjust how many Hitpoints a heart should represent by dividing it by 2 for example :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### You could also adjust how many hitpoints a heart should represent by dividing it by 2 for example :

```

```java
private void renderHP(Graphics2D g) {

        //define the x and y coordinates of our Healtbar 

>         double y = Game.window().getResolution().getHeight() - Game.window().getResolution().getHeight() + PADDING * 7 - HEART.getHeight();

Reviewer: Explain the magic numbers maybe?

        double x = Game.window().getResolution().getWidth()  - ((Player.instance().getHitPoints().getMax() * (HEART.getWidth() + PADDING) * 1.28) - PADDING);
        
        //decides weather to render a full or empty heart depending on the players current Hitpoints
        for (int i = 0; i < Player.instance().getHitPoints().getMax() /2; i++) {
            BufferedImage img = i < Math.ceil( Player.instance().getHitPoints().get()/2) ? HEART : HEARTEMPTY;
            ImageRenderer.render(g, img, x + i * img.getWidth() + PADDING, y);

        }
    }

```
- now one heart would represent 2 Hitpoints of the Player
- we use the `Math.ceil()` method to get the next bigger int and not a double

> But now we have render methods, so why can't we see our precous health? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But now we have render methods, so why can't we see our precious health? 

```

## initializing a new HUD in the `GameScreen` class

> Now to actually see a HUD, we first need to create a new one in our `GameScreen` class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now to actually see our HUD, we first need to instantiate it in our `GameScreen` class

```

```java
package org.example;

import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.Game;
import de.gurkenlabs.litiengine.gui.screens.GameScreen;

> import java.awt.*;

Reviewer: Wildcard import.

public class  InGameScreen extends GameScreen {
   
    private HUD hud;

    public static final String NAME = "INGAME-SCREEN";

    public InGameScreen() {
    super(NAME);
    }
@Override
    protected void initializeComponents() {

    //initialize a new HUD object, and add it to the GameScreen components
    this.hud = new HUD();

>     this.getComponents().add(this.hud);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    getComponents().add(hud);
```

    }
    @Override
    public void render(Graphics2D g) {

>         super.render(g);

Reviewer: No need to override the `render` method here. 
This is exactly what the parent render method in the [GameScreen](https://github.com/gurkenlabs/litiengine/blob/master/core/src/main/java/de/gurkenlabs/litiengine/gui/screens/GameScreen.java) class does.

        if (Game.world().environment() != null) {
            Game.world().environment().render(g);
        }
    }
}
```

> And there you have it your own Health bar, customizable as you wish :D

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And there you have it: your own Health bar, customizable as you wish :D
```
